---
title: "Evaluation of Precipitation Forecast of System: Numerical Tools for Hurricane Forecast"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/AdvMet8815949
date: 2020-08-05
venue: 'Advances in Meteorology'
---

Recommended citation: 'Fernández-Alvarez, J. C., <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>, Batista-Leyva, A. J., Díaz-Rodríguez, O. (2020).
Evaluation of Precipitation Forecast of Sistem: Numerical Tools of Hurricane Forecast. Advances in Meteorology, doi:10.1155/2020/8815949'


# Abstract

Heavy rainfall events, typically associated with tropical cyclones (TCs), provoke intense flooding, consequently causing severe
losses to life and property. Therefore, the amount and distribution of rain associated with TCs must be forecasted precisely within
a reasonable time to guarantee the protection of lives and goods. In this study, the skill of the Numerical Tool for Hurricane
Forecast (NTHF) for determining rainfall pattern, average rainfall, rainfall volume, and extreme amounts of rain observed during
TCs is evaluated against Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) data. A sample comprising nine systems formed in the
North Atlantic basin from 2016 to 2018 is used, where the analysis begins 24 h before landfall. Several statistical indices
characterising the abilities of the NTHF and climatology and persistence model for rainfalls (R-CLIPER) for forecasting rain as
measured by the TRMM are calculated at 24, 48, and 72 h forecasts for each TC and averaged. The model under consideration
presents better forecasting skills than the R-CLIPER for all the attributes evaluated and demonstrates similar performances
compared with models reported in the literature. The proposed model predicts the average rainfall well and presents a good
description of the rain pattern. However, its forecast of extreme rain is only applicable for 24 h.


<b>Keywords</b>: tropical cyclones, NTHF, rain forecast, statistical validation
