---
title: "Moisture Sources for the Precipitation of Tropical-like Cyclones in the Mediterranean Sea: A Case of Study"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/atmos_13081327
date: 2022-08-20
venue: 'Atmosphere'
citation: 'Coll-Hidalgo, P.; <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; Nieto, R.(2022).
 Moisture Sources for the Precipitation of Tropical-like Cyclones in the Mediterranean Sea: A Case of Study.
 <i>Atmosphere</i>,13(8), 1327. <a href='https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos13081327' target= 'blank'>https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos13081327</a>'
---
......  

# Abstract

 Tropical-like cyclones (TLCs) are hybrid low-pressure systems formed over the Mediterranean Sea, showing the characteristics of tropical
 and extratropical cyclones. The literature review revealed that several studies have focused on determining the physical mechanisms that 
 favour their formation; however, their rainfall has received little attention. In this study, we attempted to identify the origin of the 
 precipitation produced by TLCs through a Lagrangian approach based on the analysis of moisture sources for the TLC Qendresa from 6 to 9 November 
 2014. For the Lagrangian analysis, we used the trajectories of air parcels from the global outputs of the FLEXPART model fed by the ERA-5 
 reanalysis provided by the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecast and backtracked those parcels that precipitated within the
 outer radius of the storm up to 10 days. Our results showed that the moisture mainly came from the western Mediterranean Sea, Northern
 Africa, the central Mediterranean Sea, Western Europe, the eastern North Atlantic, and the eastern Mediterranean Sea with contributions 
 of 35.09%, 27.6%, 18.62%, 10.40%, 6.79%, and 1.5%, respectively. The overall large-scale conditions for the genesis of Qendresa agreed with 
 previous climatological studies. Therefore, our findings contribute to the understanding of precipitation associated with TLCs. Future
 studies will focus on a climatological analysis of the origin of rainfall produced by these hybrid cyclones.




<b>Keywords</b>:   tropical-like cyclones; Mediterranean Sea; moisture sources; precipitation; Lagrangian approach




