---
title: "Dataset of outer tropical cyclone size from a radial wind profile"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/DIB_107825
date: 2022-01-13
venue: 'Data in Brief'
citation: ' <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; Sorí, R.; Fernández-Alvarez, J.C.; Nieto, R.; Gimeno, L. (2022).
Dataset of outer tropical cyclone size from a radial wind profile. <i>Data in Brief</i>, 40, 107825, 
<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2022.107825" target="blank">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2022.107825</a>'
---

......  

# Abstract

Pérez-Alarcón et al. [1] developed a comparative climatology of the outer radius of tropical cyclones (TCs) 
from several radial wind profiles. They showed that the Willoughby et al. (2006) (W06) profile can be used 
to reproduce the TC tangential wind speed; thus, this profile is skilful for estimating the TC outer radius.
Here, we present a database of TC sizes estimated from the W06 radial wind profile in each cyclogenetic basin 
worldwide. The database incorporates the critical wind radii, where the tangential wind speed is approximately 
17.5 m/s (R34), 26 m/s (R50), 33 m/s (R64), and 51 m/s (R100), estimated by the W06 profile. The database 
has a comma-delimited text format with six-hour information on the location, maximum wind speed, central pressure,
and the different TC metrics mentioned above. This database has a similar structure to that of the Atlantic 
Hurricane Database (HURDAT2) of the National Hurricane Center. The database presented here is applicable to studies 
on TC storm surge risks as well as to the determination of the sources and sinks of atmospheric moisture related 
to tropical cyclogenesis processes.

<b>Keywords</b>: Tropical cyclone, Tropical cyclones database, Tropical cyclone climatology, Tropical cyclones size

[1] Pérez-Alarcón, A.; Sorí, R.; Fernández-Alvarez, J.C.; Nieto, R.; Gimeno, L. (2021). Comparative climatology of outer 
tropical cyclone size using radial wind profiles. Weather and Climate Extremes, 33, 100366, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wace.2021.100366

[2] Willoughby, H.E.; Darling, R.W.R.; Rahn, M. (2006) Parametric representation of the primary hurricane vortex. Part II: A new family 
of sectionally continuous profiles. Monthly Weather Review, 134, 1102-1120, https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR3106.1
