---
title: "Hurricane Maximum Potential Intensity and Global Warming"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/RCF2021v38p077
date: 2021-12-12
venue: 'Revista Cubana de Física'
citation: '<b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; Fernández-Alvarez, J.C.; Díaz-Rodríguez, O; (2021).
Hurricane Maximum Potential Intensity and Global Warming, <i>Revista Cubana de Física</i>,38(2),77-84,
http://www.revistacubanadefisica.org/index.php/rcf/article/view/RCF2021v38p077'
---
......  

# Abstract

A study of the impact of global warming on the intensity of tropical cyclones (TCs) in the North Atlantic (NATL) basin for
2050, 2075 and 2100 was developed, based on the maximum potential intensity (MPI). For this study, the   Geophysical Fluid 
Dynamics Laboratory – Climate Model (GFDL-CM4) sea surface temperature (SST) outputs and the Hurricane Maximum Potential 
Intensity (HuMPI)  model were used. In the analysis of the mean SST on TCs season, was observed an increase of 3 oC respect
to the mean SST of 2017.  For 2050, 2075 and 2100 the peak of maximum potential intensity of TCs occurs in June, displaced 
respect to 2017 where it is  observed in July and August. In addition, a continuous increase in the MPI was verified, 
reaching its extreme values at the end of this century. Thus,  for 2100 the maximum potential wind speed exceeds 325 km/h 
while the potential minimum central pressure is less than 870 hPa.  In the Gulf of Mexico, the Caribbean Sea and the Bahamas 
archipelago area are observed the highest values of potential intensity throughout the TCs season. Monthly was observed a 
similar behavior  in all years and lower values are observed in  October and November. Likewise, the theoretical intensification
rates in 24 hours observed is higher than 380 km/h in 2100, while the mean MPI will be 30% higher at the end of this Century 
than today.  Given the economic and social impact of the TCs, it is necessary to continue studying  the impact of climatic 
change on the intensity and frequency of TCs.



<b>Keywords</b>:  tropical cyclones, climatic change, global warming, intensity, hurricanes
