---
title: "Investigation of Mediterranean Cyclones and Their Contribution to Heavy Precipitation in North Africa Using ERA5"
collection: talks
type: "The 6th International Electronic Conference on Applied Sciences"
permalink: /talks/ASEC2025
venue: "MDPI"
date: 1609-12-2025
location: ""
---

Recommended citation: El-Sehwagy, A., Salah, Z., Abdel Wahab, M., <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b> (2025) Investigation of Mediterranean Cyclones and Their Contribution to Heavy Precipitation in North Africa Using ERA5 <i>The 6th International Electronic Conference on Applied Sciences</i>, 9–11 December 2025, MDPI: Basel, Switzerland. <a href="https://sciforum.net/paper/view/27713" target="blank"> https://sciforum.net/paper/view/27713 </a>
 


# Abstact
Mediterranean cyclones play a vital role in shaping rainfall patterns and intensities across North African countries, especially along their Mediterranean coastlines. These cyclonic systems are most active during the winter months and serve as a primary driver of seasonal precipitation in otherwise arid and semi-arid regions. While such rainfall can alleviate drought conditions and replenish essential water resources, it also poses significant risks. When these systems intensify, they can lead to hazardous weather events, including flash floods, infrastructure damage, and agricultural disruption. A recent example is Mediterranean Cyclone Daniel, which struck Libya in September 2023, bringing unprecedented rainfall that resulted in catastrophic flooding, widespread destruction, and tragic loss of life. In this study, we analyze several Mediterranean cyclones that have caused extreme precipitation events over North Africa to better understand their characteristics and associated impacts. Specifically, we examine the structural evolution of these cyclones, detecting and tracking cyclonic systems, including their spatial extent, lifespan, and the synoptic-scale pressure systems that accompany them. To achieve this, we utilize ERA5 reanalysis data. This integrated approach allows us to identify key meteorological patterns and mechanisms that contribute to extreme rainfall events in the region, providing insights essential for improving future forecasting and climate resilience strategies.