---
title: "Spatio-Temporal Assessment of Meteorological Drought in Puerto Rico between 1950 and 2019"
collection: talks
type: "The 4th International Electronic Conference on Atmospheric Sciences "
permalink: /talks/ECAS2021_5
venue: "MDPI"
date: 16-07-2021
location: ""
---

Recommended citation: Sorí, R.; Méndez-Tejeda, R.; Stojanovic, M.; Fernández-Alvarez, J.C.; <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; Nieto, R.; Gimeno, L. (2021), Spatio-Temporal Assessment
of Meteorological Drought in Puerto Rico between 1950 and 2019. <i>Environ. Sci. Proc. </i>, 8, 40. https://doi.org/10.3390/ecas2021-10335 



# Abstact
The phenomenon of drought is one of the most dangerous for small islands because of its impacts on freshwater availability. Thus, in this study, 
the spatio-temporal evolution of meteorological drought that affected the main island of Puerto Rico in the period 1950–2019 was investigated. In 
doing so, the Standardized Precipitation–Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI), using monthly values of minimum and maximum temperatures and precipitation 
derived from Daymet Version 4 daily data at a 1 km × 1 km spatial resolution, was used. At a 1 month temporal scale, the SPEI showed great temporal
variability, but there was a clear tendency towards wetting in the last years of the study period. A total of 85 meteorological drought episodes were 
identified. The spatial analysis also revealed that major affectation by moderate drought conditions occurred across the half west and south of the island, 
by severe drought also in the west half of the island but also along the eastern coast, and finally the extreme drought conditions, which were less frequent,
principally affected the northeast of the country. A trend analysis of the area affected by moderate, severe, and extreme drought conditions revealed a
tendency to decrease, which is reflected by the prevalence of positive spatial trends of the SPEI1 across the country

