---
title: "Moisture Sources for Tropical Cyclones Genesis in the Coast of West Africa through a Lagrangian Approach"
collection: talks
type: "The 3rd International Electronic Conference on Atmospheric Sciences "
permalink: /talks/ECAS2020_1
venue: "Portugal"
date: 16-11-2020
location: ""
---

Recommended citation: <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; Sorí, R.; Fernández-Alvarez, J. C.; Nieto, R.; Gimeno, L. (2020). Moisture
Source for Tropical Cyclones Genesis in the Coast of West Africa through a Lagrangian Ap-
proach. Proceedings of The 3rd International Electronic Conference on Atmospheric Sciences,
doi: 10.3390/ecas2020-08126.


# Abstact
Atmospheric moisture transport plays an important role in the genesis of tropical cyclones
(TCs). In this study, the moisture sources associated with the genesis of TCs in the tropical Atlantic
Ocean near West Africa, from June to November in the period 1980 - 2018 were identified. To detect
the location of the TCs genesis was used the HURDAT2 database from the National Hurricane
Center. Besides global outputs of the Lagrangian FLEXPART model were used to determine the
moisture sources that provided water vapor for the genesis of TCs. This model permitted to track
backward in time the air masses from the genesis region of the TCs and identify those regions where
air masses uptake moisture before reach the target regions. The results reveal that 18.1% (108 TC)the total number of TCs formed in the North Atlantic basin were originated in the region of study.
The major frequency for the TCs genesis was observed in August and September, each one
representing approximately 45% of the total. The transport of moisture associated with the genesis
of TCs mainly comes from the east of the North and South Atlantic Ocean, as well as from West
Africa and the Sahel region. The patterns of moisture uptake confirmed an interhemispheric
moisture transport. Finally, during the El Niño, the moisture uptake is more intense over the
Atlantic Ocean close to West Africa around 15 °N of latitude, while during La Niña the patternslightly weaker, but it covers a wider area over the Atlantic Ocean and the north of Africa.


