---
title: "Affectation and rainfall contribution of tropical cyclones in Puerto Rico from 1980 to 2016"
collection: talks
type: "The 3rd International Electronic Conference on Atmospheric Sciences "
permalink: /talks/ECAS2020_2
venue: "MDPI"
date: 16-11-2020
location: ""
---

Recommended citation: Fernández-Alvarez, J. C.; Sorí, R.; <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; Nieto, R.; Gimeno, L. (2020). Affectation
and Rainfall Contribution of Tropical Cyclones in Puerto Rico from 1980 to 2016. Proceedings of
The 3rd International Electronic Conference on Atmospheric Sciences, doi: 10.3390/ecas2020-08130



# Abstact
 This study investigated the number of tropical cyclones (TCs) that affected Puerto Rico
during the June-November hurricane season in the period 1980-2016, and their contribution to the
total precipitation. Special attention was dedicated to assessing the role of atmospheric-oceanic
teleconnections in the formation of TCs that affect this island. The HURDAT2 tropical cyclone
climatology database and the multi-source weighted set precipitation (MSWEPv2) data with a
spatial resolution of 0.1 ° x 0.1 ° were used. A total of 92 TCs within a 500-km radius of Puerto Rico
were identified for the study period. Contrary to what was expected, a similar percentage of
affectation was found between those TCs formed under El Niño and La Niña conditions. Regarding
the North Atlantic Oscillation, a 23.91 % of the 92 TCs that affected Puerto Rico formed under the
negative phase, while the 13.04% during the positive phase, which is explained in agreement with
previous findings with the weakening and shift to the south and west of the Azores High during
the negative phase of North Atlantic Oscillation. The role of the Sea Surface Temperature on the
genesis of TCs that affected Puerto Rico was also assessed through the Atlantic Meridional Mode
and the Atlantic Warm Pool area. It is confirmed that the affectation of TCs in Puerto Rico is highly
related to the eastward extension of the Atlantic Warm Pool and the Sea Surface Temperature
gradient in the tropical North Atlantic region. Indeed, a northward shift in latitude and longitude
in genesis position was found from July to November. Finally, a monthly analysis revealed that in
August and September the maximum mean rain contribution from TC was ~ 17 % for the grid but
with values in the 20-30 % interval.
