---
title: "Evaluation of microphysics schemes in the WRF-ARW model for numerical wind forecast in José Martí International Airport."
collection: talks
type: "The 3rd International Electronic Conference on Atmospheric Sciences "
permalink: /talks/ECAS2020_3
venue: "MDPI"
date: 16-11-2020
location: ""
---

Recommended citation: Coll-Hidalgo, P.; <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; González-Jardines, P. M. (2020). Evaluation of Microphysics Schemes in WRF-ARW Model for Numerical Wind Forecast in José Martí Airport. Proceedings of The 3rd International Electronic Conference on Atmospheric Sciences, doi: 10.3390/ecas2020-08121 


# Abstact
A sensitivity study was developed with Lin, Morrison 2-moment, WSM5 (WRF Single-Moment 5-class), and WSM6 (WRF Single-Moment 6-class) microphysics schemes available in the
WRF-ARW (Weather Research and Forecasting-Advanced Research WRF) for the numerical
forecast of the wind field at "José Martí" International Airport, in Cuba. The selection of these
schemes was based on their use in numerical weather forecast systems operating in Cuba. As case
studies, five storms associated with synoptic patterns that cause dangerous conditions at this
aerodrome were selected. The simulations were initialized at 0000 UTC with the forecast outputs of
the GFS (Global Forecast System) model. The schemes were evaluated according to the
representation of the wind field in the region where the airport is located, the headlands, and the
center of the runway. The errors observed are strongly dependent on the occurrence of convection,
especially on the intensity and the factors that cause it. During the dry season (November-April),
the lowest errors are observed, while the worst performance is appreciable for the rainy period
(May-October). Lin and WSM6 schemes reproduce the best behavior of the wind field on the
aerodrome.



