---
title: "Moisture Sources for the Explosive Cyclogenesis of Extratropical Cyclone Miguel (2019) through a Lagrangian Approach"
collection: talks
type: "The 4th International Electronic Conference on Atmospheric Sciences "
permalink: /talks/ECAS2021_1
venue: "MDPI"
date: 16-07-2021
location: ""
---

Recommended citation: Coll-Hidalgo, P.; <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; Fernández-Alvarez, J.C.; Nieto, R.; Gimeno, L. (2021). Moisture Sources for the Explosive Cyclogenesis
of Extratropical Cyclone Miguel (2019) through a Lagrangian Approach. <i>Environ. Sci. Proc.</i>, 8, 19. https://doi.org/10.3390/ecas2021-10331 


# Abstact
 In this study, the moisture sources for the explosive cyclogenesis Miguel that occurred
during 4–9 June 2019 in the North Atlantic were investigated. To determine the moisture sources, the
Lagrangian FLEXPART particle dispersion model was used. The moisture uptake pattern revealed the
western North Atlantic Ocean extending to north-western North America, the south-eastern coast of
Greenland, and the central North Atlantic Ocean around 45◦ N and 50◦ –20◦ W as the main moisture
sources for Miguel explosive cyclogenesis. Furthermore, the moisture uptake from these regions
was higher than the climatology. During the intensification of Miguel, the moisture contribution
from oceanic sources was higher than terrestrial sources. Although the total amount of atmospheric
moisture achieved during the explosive intensification was similar to that absorbed the 24 h prior,
they changed in intensity geographically, being more intense the local support over central and
northern North Atlantic basin.
