---
title: "Moisture sources projections under climate change for Atmospheric Rivers landfalling the Iberian Peninsula"
collection: talks
type: "International Atmospheric River Conference "
permalink: /talks/IARC2022
venue: "IARC"
date: 11-10-2022
location: "Santiago de Chile, Chile"
---

Recommended citation: Fernández-Alvarez, J.C.; <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; Eiras-Barca, J.; Ramos, A.; Nieto, R., Gimeno, L. (2022). 
Moisture sources projections under climate change for Atmospheric Rivers landfalling the Iberian Peninsula. <i> International Atmospheric River 
Conference  </i>. Santiago de Chile, Chile. 11-15 October 2022.

#Abstract

In the field of moisture transport, Atmospheric Rivers (ARs) are known as narrow corridors of water
vapor, generally 2000 km or more in length. ARs account for more than 90% of total the meridional
moisture transport and latent. Even though it has been demonstrate that most ARs are somehow
beneficial, the most intense cases are associated with extreme precipitation events, floods, landslides,
extensive property damage, and losses of life. In the context of climate change, it is projected that the
water-holding capacity of the atmosphere will be increasing at a rate close to 7 % /K1 in the both in lower
troposphere and in the column. Despite this, future changes in moisture sources which contribute to the
cited moisture transported by ARs to higher latitudes are still not known. In order to analyze these
changes, a set of simulations using the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF-ARW) model forced
with Community Earth System Model (CESM2) as well as the FLEXPART-WRF model forced with the
WRF-ARW outputs are used in this work. The analyses were carried out mainly by determining the
anomaly moisture uptake for the mid-century (MC, 2049-2053) and end-century (EC, 2096-2100)
periods, considering the annual and seasonal changes. We report that the moisture uptake anomaly
increased with maximum values, ~ 7-8 %/K, in winter for MC and EC. In addition, a latitudinal increase
in the anomalous moisture uptake pattern is projected over the central Atlantic and a longitudinal
expansion towards the Gulf of Mexico is observed.
