---
title: "Historical dataset of Mediterranean cyclones from the high-resolution ECMWF ERA5 reanalysis"
collection: talks
type: "Mediterranean Geosciences Union Annual Meeting"
permalink: /talks/MedGU2023_1
venue: "Istanbul"
date: 26-11-2023
location: "Istanbul, Türkiye"
---

Recommended citation: <b>Pérez-Alarcón, A.</b>; Coll-Hidalgo, P.; Nieto, R., Gimeno-Sotelo, L., Gimeno, L. (2023). 
Historical dataset of Mediterranean cyclones from the high-resolution ECMWF ERA5 reanalysis. <i> MedGU Annual Meeting</i>.
Istanbul, Türkiye, 26-30 November 2023.

# Abstract

The Mediterranean region (MR) shows a high annual frequency of cyclone activity, causing property damages and human losses in 
the densely populated coastal areas of the Mediterranean Sea. Unlike their tropical counterparts, there are no historical records 
of the intensity and trajectories of medcyclones from observations. Examining their features is a challenging subject of atmospheric
sciences. Although previous climatological analyses have applied cyclone detection and tracking methods, most of the resulting 
long-term datasets, including dates of occurrence, position in latitude and longitude, intensity, size and cyclone type (i.e. with
extratropical, hybrid or tropical features), are not public available. Therefore, this work proposes a historical dataset of
medcyclones (MEDCYDAT) from the high-resolution ECMWF ERA5 reanalysis from 1950 to 2022. The critical cyclone centres were identified
based on the local mean sea level pressure (MSLP), while the next track location at t + 6 hours was the nearest low to the original
low at time t. The tracking method produced 73-year of cyclone tracks within the MR defined by a rectangular domain between 25°N-50°N 
and 5°W-40°E. The resulting database is a comma-delimited text format following a similar structure to the HURDAT2 dataset provided 
by the US National Hurricane Center for tropical cyclones. Although it is difficult to assess the ability of the tracking methods 
for detecting cyclones in the MR due to no reference dataset for benchmarking (i.e., best-track for tropical cyclones), the resulting 
tracks from this work mostly agree with previous climatological studies on the annual and seasonal cyclone frequency, genesis areas 
and track density. Therefore, MEDCYDAT can be useful for different applications, such as mapping potential storm surge risk in 
coastal regions, benchmarking the performance of different artificial neural networks to detect and track medcyclones, masking 
cyclone areas to identify the origin of moisture that support their development and associated precipitation, and assessing their
contribution to monthly and annual precipitation totals in the MR.
